welcome to the live stream
so this is the first time I've done this
and at the moment I have no watches but
that's okay I'll have one Watcher that's
fantastic
so I thought I'd do this because a lot
of the podcasters and people that I
follow on social media and on YouTube
they do live streaming now euron Brooke
is one such person he's prolific he's
putting out a live stream long-form
podcasts
a few times a week he's not quite a Joe
Rogan's level but still he's able to
keep up the pace of putting out quality
material I actually find and I think a
lot of people do that are working in
this space so to speak that the live
stuff is actually the easiest stuff
doing interviews I've done Clubhouse
I've done Twitter spaces whenever you
have to just have an interview there's
no preparation involved because someone
else is nudging you with the questions
and so I don't mind just talking
straight into the camera off the top of
my head especially when someone's asking
me stuff but for my usual content that's
a whole lot of work I mean the most
recent episode I did about the fabric of
reality universality and the limits of
computation well effectively that was
sort of 25 years in the making not
really but I mean that's I first read
the book back in 1997 of course and I
don't know how many times I've read the
book since then or how many times I've
read that particular chapter
but to give you an idea of my sort of
workflow I will when the chapter is
coming up listen to it on audiobook
first I'll go for a walk and listen uh
from beginning to end just straight
through without interruption although
I'll take notes along the way as I'm
listening to the audiobook of things
that I really want to say are questions
that I think I might have and might need
explore or Exposition I might say or
things that I'm particularly interested
in so I'll go on this walk I'll listen
to the audiobook
for the chapter and then when I get home
at some time over the next few days I
will read through the text of the
chapter as well and then type out
comments on the Kindle version on the
laptop the problem is whoever made the
notes uh sort of feature inside of the
Kindle there is I don't know it's a
terror it's a terrible system for taking
notes in the book because you can write
a long note and if you hit the wrong
button it'll just delete it'll just
disappear it doesn't save as you go
along but writing notes in the Kindle
within the Kindle app is the best way
I've found to be able to highlight
sections that I want to emphasize
so after I've done all that after having
effectively read the chapter twice
listened once and then read through the
text and taken notes and then I'll start
to actually type out perhaps
an introduction a bit of a script or at
least some more rough notes about what
things I will do in order
and so as I'm saying this it's a lot of
work and then that that's just the
beginning before I even film the thing
and however long it takes to film it
takes about three times that amount of
time to edit and so interestingly enough
these live things no effort at all
almost I hit a button and then I'm going
to hit a button that says end stream
eventually and there will be almost no
effort on my part
unlike with the the other stuff that's
pre-prepared that requires all that
editing and all of that effort so I can
see why
um that kind of video tends to be more
rare than this kind of video okay but I
don't think I'm going to turn the
channel entirely into a live streaming
thing
I've been having a lot of ideas lately
and actually today I'm presuming that
this one won't go for very long because
I'm a little bit tired I haven't been
sleeping as well as I normally have
recently because of a lucky unfortunate
position I'm in where I'll wake up at
like three or four a.m with an idea in
my head of a blog post or of something
some other project that I'm working on
an idea about how to push it further
something I want to say on the podcast a
particular podcast episode I want to
make I've got a sub stack now I'll think
to myself I've really got to put that in
the sub stack and of course I could
go back to sleep or be a little bit take
on a little bit more mindfulness and
trying to uh separate myself from the
thoughts but these are these are for me
these are good thoughts I need to get up
and start writing them down and so that
means it's difficult to get back to
sleep so I mean I'm in that position at
the moment the last night and the night
before that I would I've been getting up
writing out stuff ideas for podcast
ideas for the blog and the sub stack
newsletter and all this sort of stuff so
it's kind of a fortunate position to be
in but unfortunate that it also causes a
little bit of weariness as well
um hi Anna kick yeah so if you have any
questions please ask otherwise I'm just
going to be riffing on the the usual
themes I guess the the usual things that
I talk about and of course one of the
main things that I do talk about is
optimism and I've been talking about
this recently with a number of people a
number of people have been talking to me
about the uh apparent uh lack of
optimism in the world and and what what
what causes this lack of optimism in
other words pessimism what negative
effects this can have in various
specific areas of society there's a
pervasive pessimism that exists
throughout Western Civilization a lot of
people have noticed this you have people
like Matt Riley Matthew Reilly who's
written the rational optimist so he's
noticed the the lack of optimism he
talks about why we should be better
optimists Stephen Pinker talks about it
as well of course David Deutsch talks
about it Douglas Murray talks about the
flip side the lack
of optimism and and certainly about
um the deeply pessimistic attitudes that
seem to be taking over
vast areas of the West right now is
particularly concerned about Europe and
we're all concerned about the university
system and how it's taken a pessimistic
turn the intellectuals have taken a
pessimistic turn why this is
I don't think anyone has a good
explanation so to speak but there are
hunches conjectures guesses that people
have about
sort of uh
what might be causing this culture now
my my idea is that it could just be a
simple matter matter of logic as well as
coupled with
the
careerism that exists now in the
intellectual community that rather than
seeing a university
profession as being a calling of a kind
where one wants to make fundamental
changes to our understanding of reality
and really push things forward uh in in
in major ways it's incrementalism now
I'm a strong believer in incrementalism
a proponent of incrementalism I should
say we don't want Revolution but at the
same time we want people to be able to
think about the foundations of knowledge
challenge those foundations of knowledge
so that we can have improved Grand
theories of how reality works
and so at the moment we seem to have
this this situation where in Academia
unfortunately it appears as though
one of the ways in which to climb the
academic ladder is to ape the behaviors
and the attitudes and the style of your
superiors of your boss and why wouldn't
you and at best maybe incrementally
improve on what your boss has done
rather than challenge it's not a good
career move to go around challenging
everything that your boss says
I've got a Super Chat
um
oh okay two questions actually oh this
is this is exciting
well we better go to the Super Chat one
first and then then I'll answer Astrid
Astrid's asked a question but Jeremy's
ask a question hi Brett great to see you
live streaming a question for you you
often criticize pessimism but can you
say what might be a benefit of pessimism
yes I was just criticizing pessimism
again
um so the pessimists are ubiquitous as I
say throughout intellectual culture
throughout Academia it seems to be the
way to get attention and as I've said
many many many times before one of the
reasons for this is that
there's a certain thrill to hear about
disasters we like going to see disaster
movies it's exciting to see Deep Impact
um or Armageddon you know these movies
about when the asteroid or the comet is
going to crash into the planet Earth and
metaphorically speaking this is what a
lot of intellectuals are doing today
worried about the metaphorical asteroid
well the astronomers are worried about
the literal asteroids but name your
academic or intellectual and they will
be concerned about a particular problem
that could wipe out civilization
especially if they're a scientist of
some kind or a philosopher
so they might be concerned about the
next terrible strain of a virus that is
going to be unable to be counted by any
vaccine it's a legitimate concern to
have no doubt
people might be concerned about the
resistance of antibiotics bacterial
resistance to antibiotics so there's
going to be a superbug that no
antibiotics ever going to be able to
cure and Humanity might be wiped out by
that the AGI or rather the AI apocalypse
to come
um
Nick Bostrom talks about black balls
that effectively what we're doing as
human beings with knowledge is drawing
from an urn
balls some of the balls are white balls
and these balls represent knowledge that
is solving a problem
the black ball which we haven't drawn
out yet is the one ball which if we do
draw it out it represents the piece of
knowledge which could destroy the world
and will destroy the world and we want
to avoid that now this way of thinking
about knowledge I think is completely
misconceived it assumes there can be no
solution that some problems are
insoluble and that's what the black ball
is an insoluble problem I think that is
wrong and so I've been saying recently
in some of my you know prepared podcasts
unlike this live stream
that there's this thing that I'm just
calling the master problem and the
master problem is I
slowing of progress
a slowing of any amount of progress
because any slowing of progress means
that there's going to come a problem one
day which we didn't see coming which we
won't be able to generate a solution for
in time if we slow down especially if we
slow down too much
and this unfortunately is the
consequence of the attitude the
pervasive attitude of pessimism that
runs through Academia and intellectuals
they're all talking about the problems
and rather often the prescribed solution
to the problem is to slow down progress
in some way shape or form whether it's
wealth creation resource exploitation
something like that they're slowing
things down and I think that's a far
worse problem than any specific problem
they're talking about but now I have to
say in response to Jeremy's question
what is the benefit of pessimism well I
guess you need these people to
keep on calling out the problem so we
don't ignore them that's a very very
important thing we want to be able to
identify the problems and that's what
they're doing a good job of
it's just that it's it's become so
pervasive
it's become a career for many many
people
it's a way in which to get yourself into
the media it's it's entertaining to some
extent for the media to hear about
problems and catastrophes we report bad
news don't we on the news
and so it has this flip side it seems to
me
more drawbacks now at the pervasiveness
of the pessimism
but of course we need a certain number
of these people we need it takes all
sorts as people say it's a cliche but it
does take all sorts it takes the
pessimists to highlight these problems
that otherwise maybe some of us rational
optimists might say just make progress
faster it'll be okay it is kind of um uh
I don't know what to to call it really
this not this enlightened interest
rather than enlightened disinterest this
enlightened interest in things broadly
rather than problems specifically see
this is one of the problems with live
streaming I bump the mic and now I can't
edit that out
okay so thanks Jeremy for that and thank
you for your generosity with the um the
the the the that that donation Astrid
why do you think people fixate on
measurable impacts people can make on
the world using known methods rather
than trying to come up with novel
Solutions
I think that it's not because people are
fixated on that it's because that is an
easier job to do
that's something that is learnable via
the usual and traditional institutional
techniques schools and universities are
able to train you in as you say the
known methods
and once you know the known methods then
you can solve the known problems
it depends upon what the method is
so of course if it's the so-called
method of Science and as Papa pointed
out there is no
single method of science
but the approach towards understanding
physical reality which requires us
identifying problems okay we begin with
theories we have theories about the
world
then we observe okay so we always begin
with theories then we observe and then
we find a problem
the observation
that we encounter when we point the
telescope at the sky so to speak doesn't
match what we thought we understood
about reality
and so this methodology this way of
going about things in astronomy
certainly is a way of producing good
knowledge producing new and interesting
stuff
now
rather than trying to come up with novel
Solutions well the novel Solutions is
the hard bit as I was just saying about
problems
identifying problems is the first step
and can kind of be done by anyone with a
new piece of Kit a new piece of
technology
I just saw a story just today NASA's
going to release it's very exciting for
anyone interested in astronomy the James
West James Webb James West James Webb
Space Telescope
uh the the this powerful telescope
that's been put in space you know the
success or more powerful success or to
the Hubble Space Telescope James Webb
Space Telescope is up there
collecting images and it's going to uh
we're going to be we're going to see the
deepest images of space ever now
do we expect there to be something truly
surprising there we don't know it could
be but maybe not
it's analogous to when the Hubble
telescope was first launched
in the first couple of years or
something this famous story that goes
around that the manager of the telescope
who's not usually the person that looks
through the telescope right or you
rather looks through is able to use the
telescope themselves to do research he
just manages the telescope for other
astronomers who have to apply to use the
telescope apply to NASA to use the
telescope to get telescope time so it's
called and so it's shared among many
many people competing to get time to use
the Hubble Space Telescope
but the manager of the telescope uh
simply because he's the manager was
given the privilege of being able to use
the telescope for a certain number of
hours per month for anything that he
liked I can't remember the name of this
person but he decided rather than solve
a specific problem that was known in
astronomy you know observing uh a quasar
more closely uh pointing the thing at a
distant spiral galaxy Collision
uh to take observations that might have
been able to constrain what we
understand about those processes instead
he he decided he would point the
telescope at a region of space where
there was nothing absolutely nothing
that that was black dark
so I pointed the telescope there and he
imaged that dark
patch of Sky now the thing about
telescopes is that the longer they point
at a particular piece of Sky the more
light they collect and so this thing was
pointed at that particular piece of
Skyfall I don't know hours
over the course of a month
and what was revealed was surprising it
was Galaxy after Galaxy after Galaxy
there were in every place where it
appeared to be dark actually there were
galaxies but so distant they were too
faint to see and so the
um that was what was revealed by the
Hubble telescope now was that a problem
I guess not really because
cosmologists astrophysicists astronomers
these people
they kind of guessed that the
cosmological principle held in other
words we weren't in a particularly
special place of the universe in the
universe when we look out from our
position here on Earth we do see
galaxies in every single Direction
and so the further you look the more
you're going to see the same thing more
and more and more galaxies what actually
changes is they become more and more
redshifted but don't worry about that
and so um
why why don't we come up with novel
solution we just fix out on fixed
methods the the solutions are are hard
the solutions are the hard part it's
easy to identify the problems
sometimes it can be hard to identify the
problems like I just said you point the
Hubble Space Telescope somewhere and you
might not find a problem you were hoping
there was going to be a scientist should
want to find a problem
the best thing that could happen with
the James Webb Space Telescope images is
something there that no one can explain
that's the fun part of science then
begins because you have these
pre-existing theories these ideas about
how the universe works and if something
in that image doesn't conform to our
theories wow road to progress
but of course if something is there that
we can't explain if you need a new
Theory and then it's the creativity is
required and so that's why
coming up with them
animation is so hard I don't know
whether
um you know a scientist doesn't try to
but as I also said at the beginning of
this live stream there is this idea of
careerism in Academia
I don't want to get people offside here
who might work in the University uh
sector in science
but my guess is it's not a good career
move too
say that you're
your entire
flawed in some way even if you do have a
better idea and if you do do that you
then regard it as a crank
and cast out of the polite Society of
your intellectual Community I don't know
but I'm concerned that there is that
culture in Academia
and especially with the the Unholy
coupling of social media with Academia
that academics who do stand who do tend
we've seen this recently you know any
academic who goes on Joe Rogan now
is talked about as if they're a crank
and a crazy person because they have
different ideas to the mainstream I can
imagine there's a real aversion that
even if an academic has offered
um the chance to talk to someone like
Joe Rogan they might turn it down now
for fear they're going to be ostracized
by the rest of the community no one
wants to be ostracized by their
professional Community because if they
are that could be the end of their
career
no one wants to lose their job in that
way
there is an opportunity of course to
question the assumptions of your field
to come up with a novel solution and
then to be the next effective Einstein
or Darwin who really fundamentally
changes the entire field
but there's also the risk
of not doing that and instead of being
regarded as the next pawns and Flashman
if you know that they're
experimentalists in the 80s
confusion these are the experimentalists
who thought they'd found a way of doing
Fusion the fusion of hydrogen uh in a
beaker at room temperature would have
been exciting that would have been a way
of oh well it would have completely
upset the entire understanding we have
of how Fusion happens in nuclear physics
and so on and so forth
unfortunately their experiment was wrong
now I think at least one of them it
still works in Academia but it wasn't
good for their careers
publishing these what turned out to be
incorrect results now whether they were
deliberately obfuscating the results
they would they knew they were making
everything in other words lying
I don't know if that's a really properly
being settled or not but I know that
they did
contraven usual practice which is
they held a media conference before they
published a paper
now of course there's that this whole
idea of publishing papers is part of the
standard process and so that's one of
the things I I criticized science should
be able to be done
outside of the usual channels of
peer-reviewed academic papers
I'm just having a swig of tea
Manny M reconspiracy theories I heard
you mentioned September 11 2001 on a
podcast recently
I don't remember doing that
what is your take on World Trade Center
number seven coming down seeing the
video footage Tower falling thanks I
don't remember
saying anything about this I can just
tell you what I think
what happened on September 11 were
Islamic terrorists jihadis
took control of aircraft and crashed
them into the planes
I do not see and I've watched the
documentaries the conspiracy theoretic
documentaries
that
claim
that you know
the buildings fell faster than the
acceleration due to gravity
or that there's not an image of an
aircraft crashing into the Pentagon
the frame rates of videos are a real
thing
and so I can imagine that an aircraft
traveling beyond the 600 kilometers per
hour is not going to be imaged
there's more than enough evidence that
these things and specifically in the
case of um
um World Trade Center number seven
these are events that have no precedence
and because they have no precedent we
didn't understand what could happen
until it happened
it happened
and then there are problems maybe with
the existing explanations
but where we don't jump to
is
the idea that
the American government was involved
that's where I don't jump to
I could be persuaded to say that
we don't know how aircraft crashing into
the World Trade Centers also caused the
collapse of a World Trade Center
building that was not hit by an aircraft
next door I could go as far as that I
don't think that's the case actually I
think if you talk to The Experts they
will be able to give you an explanation
of why it is that the building next door
fell down I can imagine why uh heat you
know the the the foundations upon which
those two buildings were constructed
have now themselves uh been corrupted
and so therefore buildings around are
also going to collapse I think that that
that's yeah
yeah so I I I I can't remember what I
said in the podcast recently but I
certainly think that the given
explanation is the explanation
uh yeah I haven't looked into it also
enough so I'll say that as well
uh a lot of kind words from people
saying thank you uh thank you for your
time and Naval for wisdom as well
there is mentioned from
aniket from aniket there is mentioned by
my letter at all regarding the
understanding of counterfactuals
potentially critical for understanding
artificial general intelligence thoughts
yeah perhaps perhaps this is a Avenue
towards understanding how it is that
knowledge can be constructed that
knowledge as resilient information
information that information is stuff
that could have been otherwise the
structure could have been otherwise and
so as soon as you have this idea of
counterfactuals that something could
have been in a different state
then you're in the world of
counterfactuals and if knowledge is
useful information information being
stuff that could have been otherwise
then yeah
certainly this Constructor Theory the
the science of Canada science of
counterfactuals very well might come to
bear on artificial general intelligence
now how precisely I don't know I don't
know how we go about trying to
write the algorithm for the disobedient
artificial intelligence the artificial
intelligence that will be programmed not
to follow its own program
that will be able to change its own
programming over time that will set a
goal for itself
and then never actually achieve the goal
because it finds something more
interesting to do in other words the
program for a person what is the code
for a person how can County factuals
help with the understanding of this
I would just encourage anyone who's
interested in this area to pursue that
because every single line of
Investigation here is absolutely worth
pursuing
and existing methods that seem to be
being followed my understanding is
not only aren't they bearing fruit
there's no potential for them to ever
bear fruit
I I speak about this in the the first
page of my critique of Bostrom super
intelligence it's on my blog I talk
about how well I'm I'm I'm stealing from
David Deutsch's argument I should say of
course here um he wrote an essay on this
the essay being about
how flight occurred how uh heavier than
air flight in other words airplanes how
airplanes are able to fly it wasn't by
building towers ever more tall after all
what do tall towers tall buildings and
aircraft have in common they're both up
there in the sky
so maybe if we know how to to build tall
buildings if we just keep on building
ever taller buildings eventually we'll
get to a height where
flight just happens
if this thing goes into the sky then the
heavier than an air thing will fly in
the sky as well what's that got to do
with anything it's precisely the same
kind of thing that's going on in AI at
the moment if only we continue to
improve these obedient artificial
intelligence systems if only we continue
to create ever more advanced but
obedient artificial intelligence systems
then eventually one of them will achieve
escape velocity one of them will fly
free of the obedience
algorithm they're following and they are
slavishly following those algorithms in
fact bostrom's great worry for example
is that they will follow the algorithm
so obediently that they could
potentially in the limit do something
absolutely crazy like convert the entire
universe into paper clips or try to
because they're so obedient but that's
not a super intelligence it's the
opposite to Super intelligence
or to at least to general intelligence
the very definition of which or one way
of defining it one way of understanding
what general intelligence is is it's the
system that will be able to disobey that
will disobey not obey not slavishly
follow a program but do the opposite
will never reliably do what it's told
Will creatively come up with something
better to do and that's why we always
have an advantage by the way you know
you read Bostrom and he talks about
the the super intelligent AI will always
have a decisive strategic Advantage
because if you try to switch it off it
will always be able to think of all the
ways in which you could switch it off
but how can it do that unless it's
creative and if it's creative why can't
it think about doing something then
other than the thing it's been
programmed to do in other words it's
able to be creative about absolutely
everything absolutely everything except
the one thing that it has been
programmed to do that it has to follow
slightly that makes no sense
it's both creative and not creative
simultaneously
so yeah I I don't buy it I think it's
simply a logical absurdity I think he's
saying X and not X at the same time is
contradicting himself the the super
intelligence is creative and it's not
creative because it can't possibly stop
doing this thing that it's doing it
can't figure out a way out of doing that
I think that's just false
um
John or
John Ortiz what should one study in
University well I think there's no
Universal answer to that question
at all the answer could be nothing don't
go to university
the answer could be
um all the subjects required to achieve
to get a medical degree because I really
want to be a doctor
the answer could be study the
mathematics and physics required to get
an undergraduate degree in physics so
you can do a PhD to become a physicist
but it could also be
and don't go to university but study
those things outside of the University
system so that you can think differently
to other every other physicists hitherto
that exist because you're outside of the
culture but you're still learning the
same things
of course that requires a certain amount
of Financial Freedom so to speak
because
you're unlikely to get a job in a
research institution or in a university
if you don't have the credential if you
don't have the piece of paper and you
want to go into fundamental science
however there are notable exceptions to
this you look at someone like Jaron
Lanier
the
creator of virtual reality he's worked
for Microsoft tee I think he still works
for Microsoft but it will he at least
helped create virtual reality and he's
written some excellent books like you
are not a gadget
anyway
as far as I know he didn't go to
university he didn't complete University
but I'm sure if he completed School
but you know it didn't prevent him from
getting good jobs and contributing in a
whole bunch of areas mathematics and
science and computer science and
programming and Technology
he was one of these Pioneers not only of
a certain field but a certain way of
doing things and if you're brilliant
enough
then you might not need to go to
university at all
so I don't think there's an answer to
that as to what one should study in the
university the answer could be one
shouldn't study
at University one could study outside
but the universities serve an important
purpose
what I have been saying recently is the
way I think is need
crucially needed is a free market in the
educational space
in the tertiary educational space as
well as secondary and by that I maintain
competitors to the university system
there needs to be some alternative some
place for people to go be fostered
nurtured
so that
coming out of school or wherever they
happen to be coming from they have an
alternative to the university system
because many people have talked about
the culture of Universities at the
moment
but not merely the political culture we
can leave that to one side for a moment
bad as that might be
but the other kind of culture the
intellectual culture that trains the
students to think in a particular way in
a particular tradition
and does not reward students from I mean
the opposite or thinking the opposite or
pushing ideas that are opposed to the
expert opinion
the university is a a way of here's the
knowledge that's already known we're
going to assess you on that
that's the whole way the thing is set up
to train people to understand the body
of knowledge as it is known now but if
you want to make fundamental progress
clearly what it's all about is rejecting
the body of knowledge that's already
known in some way
and the university system does not seem
to be set up to do that
it certainly doesn't reward the
undergraduate for doing that let's say
so if only we had an alternative that
that was out there that was able to
allow for young creative people
who are going to be the next iconoclass
not interested in making incremental
improvements on the science that's out
there but fundamentally changing certain
fields
and to do that
especially at a young age
we might need a different system
I think you know people have made this
point before that if I can just speak
about physics you know the area that
sort of I went through and was trained
in
the idea seems to be
learn new mathematics learn
Newtonian classical mechanics learn
Electro the magnetism learn
thermodynamics
learn this base of knowledge and then
you learn quantum theory then you know
and and relativity you know learn that
stuff
but why are we learning necessarily
complicated at times you know the
calculus can get complicated the
differential equation can get
complicated
when it comes to even classical
Newtonian mechanics why do we have to
learn that first and spend hours upon
hours lecture after lecture tutorial
after tutorial
experimental lab testing all of this
stuff this classical mechanic stuff
before we can learn
quantum theory
why why why is it stopped like that why
do we have to learn what we already know
is false Newtonian mechanics before we
can go on and learn the stuff that as
far as we know is the good stuff
moreover
think about stuff that might go beyond
even the quantum mechanics why is it
this hierarchy well it's because of the
way in which the the it's the way in
which people Envision knowledge as being
a kind of hierarchy of building uh this
set of blocks you're building it up
you're building a an edifice of
knowledge but knowledge isn't like that
it's all like an interconnected web and
a lot and it's all misconceptions and
some of those misconceptions we already
know are false in the ways in which
they're false so that's just one example
of how it is that you know uh
we could be doing science teach
different
especially physics teaching different
it's not to say that Newtonian mechanics
isn't useful important or anything like
that Engineers need to know this stuff
it's important it's useful it solves a
problem
knowledge is information solves a
problem and Newtonian mechanics is
absolutely that but spending years on
this stuff
the mathematics required to understand
how useful is that if you want to be the
physicist who is going to not overturn
Newtonian mechanics because that's
already been done not build a better
Bridge because you're not interested in
being an engineer but finding the
problems with quantum theory let's say
okay or relativity so you can go further
you can do something different do
something better
well why not start with quantum theory
so that could be a way to go
um Arjun kamani hi Arjun
that's a question I think unconventional
request an icebreaker perhaps can we
talk about your cat or are we just going
to never bring it up you know what I
mean
um
my cat at the moment
happens to be making a lot of noise if
you could let me know on the live stream
whether or not you can hear it It's
banging on the door
I can hear it it's distracting
um I can't open up the doors because
then it's too noisy
I have to have the doors closed but if I
close the doors the cat starts
scratching on the doors this is the
problem I have with podcasting so
so yeah I've got I've got more than one
cat I've got two cats
um so can't hear the cat is that cat
cats hear the cat if you
so I um yeah I I yeah the cat's here the
cat is a a a frustrating part of
podcasting sometimes it peacefully sits
on the chair next to me but quite often
it wants to go wandering around and as
soon as I allow it to do that then I
that entails opening the doors
which means the noise from the street
comes in okay so that answers that
uh RH Max we'd love to have you on my
channel sometime to talk about the
beginning of infinity and related Works
yes well that's what I do these days so
happy to um happy to talk anytime
uh Jedi trades
could AI have an advantage over humans
partially because when it comes up with
new or unusual ideas or theories it
doesn't have any emotional entanglements
jealousy Envy disapproval Etc so I
presumably mean artificial general
intelligence
um I guess we don't know about whether
or not it would have emotional
entanglements
I don't see why it wouldn't
emotion is a kind of input it's a
sensation we have
why would an AGI be denied these
Sensations
well we would have to understand how it
is that these emotions arise in our
cells first is it
down to purely a matter of biology I
don't know I'm not persuaded that
something like sadness or fear those
kind of things necessarily require a
certain kind of biology why couldn't
they be simulated via some silicon means
I don't know I don't know but let's
let's uh presume for a moment that
we did have such an island that didn't
have a motion
and and this this this is a staple of
course of lots of science fiction
that they just presume that uh a lot of
the AI don't have emotion I think did
data on Star Trek or data on Star Trek
he didn't have a motion uh he was an
artificial intelligence and this this
seems to often be the case that they
just won't have emotions because so the
argument goes emotions are something
like hormonal and they won't have
hormones or their uh it's something to
do with neurotransmitters but of course
I think that's the wrong level of
analysis what you're looking at there is
um the physical substrate the physical
substrate of intelligence we are
intelligence we are creative
we run on brains and we exist in bodies
which have chemical hormones and
neurotransmitters which are the main
ways in which signaling happens and
therefore what's going on in the brain
the reason why we have any experience at
all is down to these chemicals
a GI won't be made presumably of the
same stuff it'll be a different physical
substrate
but this is the thing about computation
it's substrate independent it doesn't
matter what the program is running in
in principle anything that we can do and
experience can be done and experienced
by
the other system now you might say oh
but we don't have a theory of
consciousness
whatever Consciousness is Mystery as it
is I still think the laws of physics
apply to it and one of the laws of
physics is the universality of
computation that the Turing principle
still applies
the if something exists in physical
reality and Consciousness arises in
physical reality then it can be
simulated it can be simulated by a
computer system in theory in principle
we just don't know what the program is
at the moment for artificial general
intelligence okay I got off track but
let's say you could have such a thing
let's say you could have a creative
entity in other words a person
that didn't have emotions
would it have an advantage no I think
it'd have a disadvantage I think
emotions provide important information
about the world they can provide clues
intuitions intuition to me is a kind of
knowledge that is inexplicit it can be
in error it often is an error but the
intuitions are something people should
pay attention to if you're walking down
a street late at night and you have the
intuition someone's following you that's
real knowledge somehow or other you've
gotten the the queue or the clue that
there's someone following you you turn
around you find that in fact it's true
it doesn't happen often where I am given
a lovely peaceful area but people can
have these experiences you know you have
the Sensation that someone's looking at
you you look up and there they are
looking at you what is it well you've
seen something in the periphery of your
eye or something like that something
like that who knows how we're picking up
some of these signals sometimes from the
environment but intuition is nothing
Supernatural or anything like that but
insofar as intuition is some kind of
feeling emotion well then an AI that
lacked all emotion wouldn't have that
uh fear is probably on a Continuum with
something like intuition
um a curiosity could be something like
an emotion and so therefore this is why
I'm saying you know jealousy Envy you've
got up there I jealousy and envy might
they could be in part instinctual inborn
ideas in other words but they could also
be learned
some people can be more jealous than
others now is this because they're born
naturally more jealous
or do they learn jealousy over time
I tend to think that a lot of emotion
can be learned we we talk about phobias
it's a fear that has been learned
possibly very early on in life possibly
very early in life you're imprinted with
the idea that spiders are scary because
you're taught spiders are scary because
your parents were scared of spiders and
so on somehow they passed it on perhaps
some people the classic example is dogs
of course anyone who has a bad
experience with a dog early on in life
tends to end up being afraid of dogs for
the rest of their life and some people
can even talk about the particular
incident that caused them to be scared
of dogs
other people love dogs because they have
positive experiences with dogs early on
in life
so this fear of something is a learned
often a learned behavior now could there
be inborn fears that people have yes
as well okay but that's not to say we
can unlearn them again this is where I
disagree with that dichotomy that I've
talked about a lot of times as if there
is
a Pinker wrote the book about the blank
slate arguing against the blank slave
as if there are only
two possible ways to go here that either
some of your behaviors are utterly
determined by your genetics
or you're a blank slate and you can do
whatever you like and there are no
inborn ideas the Third Road
in my opinion is
you
have inborn ideas you're not a blank
slate absolutely there are inborn ideas
that you come into this world with
but they do not determine your behavior
what they give you are ideas you have
ideas you have inborn ideas
and you can change your ideas you can
change your mind you can criticize those
ideas you can figure out ah I was born
with that idea I don't like that idea I
was born with that idea I do like that
idea you know that idea has always been
with me I've always been scared of this
thing let's say I've always been scared
of spiders I was born with it
but maybe you don't like being scared of
spiders can you train yourself out of it
with difficulty but it's possible
absolutely it's possible as any
psychologist would be able to tell you
that's their business their business
model is trying to have people change
their ideas and it's when psychology is
at its best when people have ideas they
they're plagues with that they don't
want
and the the good wise psychologists can
help them understand specifically what
those ideas are give voice to the
inexplicit change them and allow the
person to make personal progress in
their life okay
I'll I'll stop this in a moment I think
it's we've we've done well I I know I
seem to know what I'm doing now so next
time maybe later today
um I'll I'll try again I'll announce it
more early on Twitter
can you show us your books there in the
other room I mean I used to have the
bookcase in the background but I'm uh
yeah I don't anymore
um sitting right here of course
foreign three of the best I have uh this
is always in reach as you can see
um
and um of course Consulting this now and
again
and
to top it off
yes of course popper is there as well
which I dived into uh semi-regularly
so you can see three of my books
what do you think of Google's Lambda
have you read the transcript published
with Lambda where it wants its own
rights and to be asked permission yeah I
think it's a nice trick
nothing more than that it's not
generating knowledge it's not saying
anything that is uh giving us insights
it's it's aping
it's it's a it's an impressive chat bot
uh I don't think it's anything more than
that I'm not excited about it uh you
know not I'm no more excited about than
I am about any impressive chat bot
the measure of Consciousness and
creativity is not the capacity to
um a fool a few people in the Turing
test
the measure is being able to generate
explanations new explanations now
is it creating knowledge I haven't seen
evidence of that
um you know
yeah yeah
um there there is that story in the
beginning of infinity about how the an
early researcher was tricked by
uh his own students who were pretending
to be the chatbot
but of course
it was the students they he should have
been more skeptical now I'm not
skeptical I think that the that this AI
chatbot actually is producing these
interesting answers I just don't think
they're interesting enough I'd want
longer conversations longer transcripts
and then we would see you know the the
the the capacity
the memory capacity
that computers have
therefore the Corpus of conversations
that chatbots have access to now is vast
and so it's just pulling from this vast
list this library of conversations and
pattern matching being able to fit you
know it's the that's the the
um what's it called Searles room the
Chinese room where you you know you're
passing uh messages underneath the door
and you're getting back
um things that make sense in Chinese now
this this is not a measure of
Consciousness or creativity or anything
like that
um yeah all of these AI
it it reminds me of as Jaron Lanier
again to go back to him to talk about
him uh he talks about translation
you go to
um Google translate and it's becoming
better and better and better all the
time
as he rightly says
this is not because
the computer system itself is
intelligently translating anything
what's happening is that Google the
company is scraping up more and more and
more actual translations that have been
done out there in the real world by
actual translators by human beings who
are translating from English into French
you know from French into Mandarin
whatever and Google just gathers them
all together
and compiles them into vast vast
libraries of one-to-one translations of
sentences and phrases and individual
words
and the sophisticated program then can
translate what you type into the Google
translate thing giving you the illusion
that it's Google that's doing the
creative work but the creative work was
done elsewhere some time ago by actual
human beings it's disguising it now
Jaron linear makes a big deal about this
because
it seems to be commercially unfair
that on the one hand the translators are
kind of being put out of a job to some
extent by this automated process
but it is their work which is allowing
for Google to do what it does in the
first place now I think automation is
good and needs to be pursued but I think
as any person who is a a dual language
speaker will tell you Google Translate
is terribly prone to errors impressive
though it is
so too with Google's Lambda
you can pick like you go to Google
Translate now and again it'll do the
most wonderfully perfect translation and
even a translator would be impressed why
because you got lucky you got lucky with
the phrase or the sentence you put in
and it spat out a perfectly good natural
translation
often that doesn't happen
what do we do in science you know Google
Lambda let's repeat the experiment again
and again and again and let's see how
impressive it is once we start moving
beyond those
kinds of conversation maybe it's been
programmed specifically really really
well with lots and lots of data about
conversations that I had about
Consciousness and suffering and all
those kind of things let's get it on to
something else
I don't think it's learning okay it's
not learning by conjecturing new ideas
and criticizing those ideas it's
impressive
but not impressive in the sense of being
a creative learner okay I think they're
very separate things
for uh how would I Define sentience well
only circularly I don't think that so
this is from Emmett
peppers how would you yes sentience
just like Consciousness is something we
possess
and we don't know what it is
it's a word for subjective experience
but in saying all those three terms
subjective experience consciousness
sentience
we're just describing a thing that is
indescribable
it's the great mystery of Consciousness
now when I say great mystery I still
just think it's a problem
we don't know
how to put into words
precisely what the problem is why as Sam
Harris says why it should be like
something to be a human being
why is it like this why is the sky blue
why does it look that way why do things
feel a certain way taste of it certain
way why should it be like that
why do we have subjective experiences
why isn't the world just objective and
automatic we don't know this yet and
it's hard to even
even in saying what I've just said
doesn't really describe the problem
my personal just guess
um is that it's tied up with this AGI
question which is tied up with precisely
how knowledge is created which is about
creativity
how do you get from you know the the the
the unknown to the known
what's going on there
um I don't know but I think these things
are tied up together many people will
say no consciousness is is quite
different to creativity
I don't know about that I think the
creativity is what we recognize in other
people
that you can notice a person is creative
you can't observe their Consciousness
that's the first person perspective but
you can observe their creativity you can
observe that Einstein cradius theorems
you can observe that your friend is
talking in Creative sentences
you can observe that
and on the basis of that you infer
Consciousness that they're having a
similar subjective experience to you
they're having a subjective experience
of some kind and so I think that it
could just be two sides of the same coin
this creativity Consciousness thing I
could be wrong about that as well and
I'd throw in free will into that as well
these are all Mysteries and as I've said
elsewhere you know when someone denies
one of the Mysteries that crops up
somewhere else in fact I think I stole
that from Jaron Lanier again the name
name him for the third time
you know Sam Harris denies free will
but for him Consciousness is a great
mystery it's a great mystery so this
great mystery of the activity of the
Mind crops up for him in Consciousness
and he spends a lot of time talking
about the mystery of Consciousness quite
rightly I think
Daniel Dennett does precisely the
opposite
he doesn't think Consciousness is a huge
mystery he wrote that book consciousness
explained
he doesn't think it's a great mystery
um and he thinks that we do have free
will and he thinks Free Will is you know
it's he's a determinist or compatibilist
of a kind
so people have you know
a desire sometimes to talk down a
particular thing or to say that a
particular thing doesn't exist only for
a similarly
completely mysterious thing to rise up
in its place elsewhere and I just think
that maybe these things are all labeling
the same problem
that the solution to any one of them
might be the solution to all I don't
know Free Will Consciousness creativity
maybe it will all come together but time
time will tell once we have a better way
of putting the question
rather than just saying what do these
words really label because that's not
what philosophy is about we want to know
how knowledge is created
how to
find the algorithm for an AGI so to
speak and maybe then
there'll be an insight there needs to be
a philosophical Insight here before we
can make the any scientific let alone
technological progress towards
artificial general intelligence
uh etiquette for what it's worth from
the Lambda paper it cannot be generated
with understanding it's just putting
words together that makes sense yeah I
agree I agree with that totally
um
and Jedi trades the the famous alphago
move number 78 might be impossible to a
human because they would would have been
considered foolish or stupid to make a
movie yeah yeah I know yeah um yeah but
that doesn't mean it's creative
it means that um it's exploring a space
of possibilities that people can't
calculate their you know people are
Universal explainers but as I was saying
in my last episode that doesn't mean
we're Universal calculators but that
doesn't prevent us from understanding
stuff so now in retrospect in retrospect
is it the case
having seen alphago do that
that a person would be now considered
foolish or stupid to make that move no
quite the opposite because we know that
there are such moves that appear to be
stupid
perhaps in chess perhaps an alphago
appear to be stupid to us ahead of time
but in retrospect appear to be the best
move right so now we know that so now we
wouldn't call them foolish or stupid so
we can explain what's going on even if
we couldn't calculate it beforehand but
it could calculate all the possible you
know well not all the possible ones but
it can calculate a vaster Ensemble of
nerves than we have any hope of doing
and it's doing it by raw power
rather than uh conjecture and criticism
although I think it has a certain amount
of uh methods of criticizing its own uh
programming but not creative they've
been programmed in they're fixed
because after all if it was genuinely
creative it would decide to do something
other than play off a go eventually
um
yep it's a conversation going on okay so
I think
good people are having a conversation
okay I think I'm going to
um end the live stream here it's been a
lot of fun thank you for tuning in it's
almost exactly an hour so time flies
when you're having fun
um and as I say you know this for me
this is relatively straightforward
compared to the other stuff that I do
um so if you did enjoy this
um feel free to think of any questions
and I'll try and do this again soon
but until I do bye-bye now